

An Atheist’s Exploration of Consciousness and the “Enlightenment” Experience
Phil Berent
·
Feb 10, 2024





I recently heard an excellent NPR (National Public Radio) “Radio Lab” program on “spiritual experience” at the end of which was posed an interesting questions: what is the commonality of the different types of spiritual experience: from the feelings experienced by those taking psilocybin mushrooms; to the feelings of those having a religious experience while singing campfire songs within a Christian evangelical group? The program also asked why these experiences are “ineffable” or inexpressible in words.

This is my shot at giving an answer to these questions. The answers draw on ideas from Buddhist meditation, Freudian psychology and the French post structuralist philosopher Lacan, and also I believe show the links between these three, and the personality transformation seminars such as E.S.T. and Anthony Robins and, oh yes, psilocybin mushrooms. Also I think I can answer the question as to why by their very nature these experiences are ineffable. [i](see endnote “A note on definitions and use of concepts”)

So back in 1980 I was at Sussex University near Brighton in England. I had exams coming up and papers due and was under quite a lot of stress. Someone told me that there was a Buddhist meditation group and suggested that I give it a try. The group was run by monks from a nearby Buddhist monastery. They were a multinational group and the monastery had originally been in Thailand. However, when tensions had escalated in neighboring Cambodia, they had packed their bags and moved on masse to a big house in the English countryside.

At any rate, once a week one of these weird looking blokes with shaved heads and orange robes and sometimes with a Thai accent and sometimes with an Australian or an English accent, would preside over a half hour meditation and then talk to us beautifully, logically and simply about the workings of the mind. I learned a lot from these lectures and actually a lot just from meditation.

Here is what meditation taught me:
When one starts a meditation session one makes a decision that for some period one is going sit cross legged and concentrate on the physical sensation of breathing, or possibly repeating a mantra, or slowly mentally counting from one to ten — or actually any one of a number of meditation practices. After a few minutes I would find that I was getting impatient and uneasy and would have a strong desire to stop. This is interesting. I seem to be having two contradictory desires at the same time. On the one hand I decide that I want to remain still with my eyes closed for half an hour. On the other hand I am CHOOSING to have negative thoughts which will sabotage the process that I have decided would be beneficial. I emphasize the word “choosing” because at some level I must be deciding to have these negative thoughts. After all, there is no one else in my brain directing my thought process — so it has to be me.

This is of course similar to what most people experience waiting in a long line at airport check-in counters, or at the DMV office. There are two logical reactions to long lines. The first is to decide “I don’t care about taking this flight or renewing my license” and to walk away. The second logical choice is to decide to stay in the long line and decide to be happy about it. Of course, what most people do is to take the third and illogical choice. That is, they decide to stay in the line and decide to be unhappy and stressed. Again I emphasize that as there is no other brain involved it must be the brain of the person in the line that is actually deciding to generate unpleasant emotions.

Further consideration shows that these negative thoughts come from “intelligence” and “interpretation”. I think it’s safe to assume that a lot of people get frustrated and upset standing in lines because they are aware of the fact they are sacrificing doing something else, such as being on time for an appointment, or shopping, or watching TV, or moving forward with other projects. However, imagine that we could switch off our intelligence and understanding, that we could become morons at will (and of course switch back as well). Then, every time we found ourselves in a line or in a traffic jam or if we arrived at the deli with our heart set on a raisin bagel only to find that they are sold out, then we could switch into “moron mode” and, as long as our situation doesn’t involve actual physical discomfort, we would not be worried stressed or disappointed, and could be happy.

This, I think, is one of the great insights of Buddhism. Often we are unable to change our situation, but it is possible to change our perception and interpretation of a situation. I remember one of the Sussex monks tapping a pencil on a table and asking “what did I just do?”. Someone of course replied “you tapped a pencil on the table”. The monk said “Yes that’s true, but can you try to experience the sound without thinking about what caused it? Or can you even go one step further and experience the ‘sensation of hearing the sound’ without even thinking that it is a sound?”

What we actually experience is a stream of sense impressions. We however have incredible, and if one considers it, absolutely awe inspiring skill to convert these light waves, vibrations in the air and particles going up our noses, into an understanding and interpretation of our environment. Most of the time, this understanding is useful. Sometimes, such as when we are crossing a busy street, it is vital to our survival. At other times, such as when we are waiting in line at the DMV our understanding only causes us distress.

At the same time that I was going to meditation classes, although my major was Economics, I was studying some basic Freudian theory. According to Freud we are born with an “Id”. The Id is the basic “desiring self”. It wants warmth, food, love, sex, cuddles, appreciation, and so on. The Id however has no smarts, it “wants” but it has no idea how to “get”. To solve this problem in Freud’s framework the “Ego” is created. The Ego is the brains of the operation. It works for the Id and uses its smarts and understanding to go out and “get”.

The French post-structuralist Jacques Lacan talks about the formation of the Ego as being the “mirror image” of the development of language. I found Lacan to be pretty obscure. Apparently this was at least partially deliberate. Lacan is known to have said that he thought that his students listened harder if they couldn’t understand him. Nevertheless, one interpretation of “Ego as mirror image of language” seems to make a lot of sense:

As infants we are faced with an incomprehensible stream of sense impression data. In order to deal with this information flow, and to be able to service the desires of the Id, we learn to recognize similar data patterns and give them names like “cup”, “mama”, “no-load mutual fund” and so on. So, on the one hand (or “one side of the mirror”) we are dividing the world into conceptual objects and naming them or developing our own “language”, on the other hand (or “other side of the mirror”) the way that we understand the world and how we divide it into concepts defines who we are, and is therefore our Ego. So the Id wants, and the Ego classifies, identifies and understands. So effectively the development of language and the formation of the ego are opposite sides of the same coin (or “mirror”).

But, one might respond, this doesn’t make sense, as surely a person growing up in England or America doesn’t “develop their own language” they learn to speak English, people growing up in France learn to speak French, and so on.

The thing is, that the infant’s original learning of language is not just rote learning the sounds of words. When we add a new word to our vocabulary we also add our understanding of that word. We consider what that object means to us: that is, how it could help us or hinder us in achieving a direct or indirect objective of the Id. “Mama” supplies cuddles and food; “cup” works great as a container for liquids and so helps deal with the Id’s thirst issues, and so on. In many cases we will also decide on an appropriate emotional reaction to the object. “Pussy cats” and “Ice Cream” make us happy, “burglars” and “ghosts” are scary and so on.

Corresponding to every object in our vocabulary we therefore have an internal representation which tells us what this object means to us. Our internal representation also picks out salient features which allow us to identify new instances of the object (for example I could see a cup, or a horse, or an armchair that I have never seen before and still recognize it as a cup, a horse or an armchair). Effectively we create our own “conceptual dictionary” which allows us to “look up” sequences of sense impressions and read a “definition” which tells us what this means to us and possibly an appropriate emotional response.

Whenever we see a new instance of an object, in the automatic an almost instantaneous process that we go through of asking “What is that?”, we look up the entry in our conceptual dictionary and we immediately know what we should think and feel about what we have seen.

People certainly change their internal representations as a result of their experiences. However, in the first few years of life we learn several thousand of words and develop the same number of corresponding internal representations. Once we have created this foundation, we tend to rely more and more on the concepts that we already have. A lot of the “curiosity of childhood” is about exploring the things around us and fitting them into our pattern of understanding. As we get older we increasingly become users of our conceptual dictionary and modify its entries less and less.

Once we have created our conceptual dictionary, life becomes simple. If we didn’t have a comprehensive conceptual dictionary every time we were thirsty we would have to go through a thought process something like:

“I know that that if I turn that metal object, the pipe underneath it will exude liquid and if I consume that liquid it will lessen my distress. I also know that I need a container otherwise the liquid will fall to the ground and I see that I have an object available to me which has an indentation such that it could contain liquid.”

Using our conceptual dictionary our thought process becomes “I’m thirsty so I will fill up that glass with water from the tap”.

This implies that we don’t really experience a true understanding of our environment at all. We examine our surroundings, and pick up just enough clues to be able classify the objects around us according to our dictionary. Once the classification is complete, we move as quickly as possible to examining the dictionary entry that we have on each object, so that we can understand how it can hurt us or help us. This is of course very useful. “Large quadruped moving rapidly towards us making loud noises and barring its teeth” should not be considered too deeply. In this case, the stored mental notes that we have classified under “vicious dog” are quite adequate. Also notice that in this case, without the need for further consideration, our dictionary entry instantly brings us an appropriate emotional reaction and the readiness for fight or flight.

Despite being very useful, this means that most of the time we are not experiencing the real world. Rather, we are looking at the representations of objects in our surroundings that we have stored as entries in our conceptual dictionary, and we are considering their meanings to us in terms of the implications and connections that we have already created for ourselves: essentially moving from one preconceived idea to the next. Of course if something doesn’t fit into our classification system we will examine it more carefully and try to relate it to objects that we do understand. However, I would argue that in general we spend a lot more time looking inwards and referencing and considering entries in our conceptual dictionary, than we do looking outwards at the world around us.

This perhaps makes it a bit clearer why it makes sense to draw a parallel between Freud’s concept of the Ego and Lacan’s “acquisition of language” or what I have called our “conceptual dictionary”. Our true experience is sense impression data. However, our understanding of our surroundings, our attitudes and emotions, and of course therefore our responses to our environment, are all determined by how we understand what we experience, and that understanding comes from the structure that we have built in our conceptual dictionary.

Until age seven I lived in Italy. I therefore learned to speak Italian at the same time that I learned English. The culture in Italy is very different to English or American culture, and although it is of course possible to translate from one language to the other, the implications and connotations of words are often different in English and in Italian. My Italian is now pretty rusty, but whenever I speak Italian I approach perception using the set of language objects that I acquired as a child in Italy. The words ‘scuola’, ‘pranzo’, ‘negozio’ and ‘bicicletta’ all evoke slightly different feelings and connotations than do their direct English translations: “school”, “lunch”, “shop” and “bicycle”. When I speak Italian therefore, I am understanding the world with a slightly different set of conceptual objects than I use when I speak English. Effectively my “Ego” is changed when I “think in Italian” and I become a slightly different person. (Of course as both “versions of me” have had common life experience, there are concepts and connotations that are common to both versions, so that the change is slight, as opposed to a fully fledged Jekyll and Jiacomo transformation.)

Experiences of Transformation and Enlightenment

In summary, who we are as people is made up of a combination of our basic drives (the Id), which are obviously slightly different for each person, and the set of conceptual objects that we use to understand our surroundings, which is both our internal and external language, and is also our Ego.

We are only able to navigate through life because of our Understanding (capitalized to show a specific usage of the word defined as follows). By Understanding I mean that we interpret our sense impressions using our conceptual dictionary and convert and separate them into conceptual objects. Each of these conceptual objects has implications for us in terms of meeting the requirements of our Id and therefore results in an emotional reaction according to whether the thing or situation is analyzed as helpful or harmful. These emotional reactions are largely automatic as for example with our instant reaction to the charging vicious dog.

Our fundamental drives, I believe, have been exquisitely and precisely designed by the evolutionary process. After all, if millions of years of evolution have designed and perfected something as complex as the eye (and the brilliant engineering of living creatures generally) how likely is it that the emotions are not similarly structured to maximize the potential for the continuation of the species? For example, evolution has long ago eliminated any species variant that did not fear physical harm and death.

Our brilliant physical design gives us the capability to “do”. But do what? Without our fears, and our desires, our likes and our loves, we would have no reason to do anything at all. After all if one is completely satisfied in one moment, why move, why get up, why pursue dreams and goals, and so on.

Essentially, therefore, one could argue that one’s actions in life are driven by moving from one state of dissatisfaction to the next. Our Understanding tells us what is wrong at each moment, or at least what could be better, and we move to fix the situation. Although it is vital, therefore, our Understanding is also the source of all distress and dissatisfaction, other than direct physical pain.

So why would we ever want to argue with our Understanding? If, as I say, this mechanism has been brilliantly designed by the evolutionary process and has so far maximized the continuation of the species, why not just “go with it”? My answer would be that evolution “cares” about species continuation not about the happiness or satisfaction of individual members of that species. The emotions of anger, ambition, jealousy and fear have clearly (I believe) been vital to the continuation of human and other species. This doesn’t necessarily mean that as individuals we necessarily want to always be subject these emotions.

So how can we escape being at the beck and call of emotions delivered to us in an efficient and timely fashion by our Understanding? There are three possible ways. Firstly we can try to reduce the continuous output of needs and demands produced by the Id. Secondly we can try (when appropriate) to switch off our Understanding so that life and experience flows over us instead of being instantly analyzed and converted into emotions and desires to act. Thirdly we can try to change and tailor our Understanding so that the set of concepts by which we live, results in perceptions and emotions that are more useful and helpful.

When I was 16, I read Siddhartha by Herman Hesse. It is about the physical and spiritual journey of a boy (possibly supposed to be the Buddha) to achieve enlightenment. In the book he again and again referred to the concept of “letting go of the Self” as the difficult road to enlightenment. At the time I read this, this seemed to be so much spiritualistic gibberish. At least, despite my best efforts, I didn’t understand it. If, however, we consider that the Self is analogous to what I called the Ego, this starts to make sense. The Self is then the set of concepts that make us who we are, our inner language by which we understand our world. “Letting go of the Self” then means letting go of the Ego, ceasing to use our Understanding, or moving (obviously only temporarily) to a conscious state where one is experiencing sense impressions at a fundamental level rather than giving a meaning and interpretation to each one. This brings me back of course to the Tibetan monks in Brighton who urged us to hear the pencil tap without trying to understand what it was.

The “enlightenment” experience can therefore possibly be seen as the release of our superimposed framework of interpretation on the world. If things in this sense are “experienced” as opposed to “understood”, suddenly and for the moment in which this mental shift occurs, nothing “matters” as whether and how things “matter” to us is a function of our Understanding. If nothing “matters”, if for even for one moment someone achieves a mental state of experience without interpretation, then for that moment one is no longer moving from one state of dissatisfaction to the next, and everything is “perfect”.

I think that it makes sense that this experience should be seen as so powerful. If we are able to temporarily let go of our superimposed framework of meaning, suddenly we are no longer burdened by all of the “reasons” for which we act and live. For that time we can no longer be dissatisfied as we have nothing to be dissatisfied about. Also this experience can allow us to see that the framework of meaning that we have superimposed on our existence is in some ways arbitrary, and show us the possibility of choosing different frameworks which would allow us to experience life differently.

Those who feel that they have experienced enlightenment (or some part of it) will also talk about the experience of a universal “oneness”. This also makes sense in terms of the analysis given above. The acquisition of language is a process of distinction, separation and division, effectively a denial of universality. Ceasing to classify, again even if only for a brief period, can show us that while it can be useful and functional, our division of the world into separate physical and conceptual objects is essentially an arbitrary human construction.

I should add that by trying to explain this (“enlightenment” that is) that I am in no way attempting to devalue the beliefs or perception or those who have experienced it. In fact, through my own thought, meditation, and participations in Buddhism and other programs I feel that I have seen small corners of the experience of what might be called enlightenment or expanded consciousness. I have been moved and changed by these experiences and have found them useful and powerful. (I am probably digging myself a hole here, but I am categorically NOT saying that I consider myself in any sense “enlightened”, just that that I have respect for those that pursue enlightenment or claim to have had this experience)

As a side note, a few years ago there was a very interesting episode of This American Life on NPR. The episode contained an account by a man who had previously had a severe testosterone deficiency. He said that for this period essentially all his drive was gone. Days would be spent lying in bed staring at the ceiling. Alternatively he would take long walks. Nothing seemed to matter very much. However he said that during this period he was not depressed. On the contrary the one thought that would come to his mind again and again as he stared at the ceiling or walked round and observed people and buildings in his neighborhood, was the blissful thought that “it’s perfect”. This sounds in some ways similar to the enlightenment experience. We could consider from this account (I would ask those who feel I’m stretching a point here to forgive this flight of conjecture) that testosterone is effectively the “volume control” on the Id. In other words, the structure of wants and desires is defined by the Id, but the amount that we want and desire those things is determined by testosterone. Someone with severe testosterone deficiency therefore has a low functioning Id. As there is no continuous flow of wants from the Id, the Ego has no need to perform its function of continuously interpreting sense impressions (to determine their relation to the wants of the Id). As a result, someone in this state tends to exist more in experience than interpretation. Also as there is no interpretation nothing is “wrong” and everything can be seen as “perfect”. Essentially someone with this type of testosterone deficiency “lets go of the self”.

Buddhism, and Self-Improvement Seminars:

If the experience of “enlightenment” is at least in some way connected with “letting go of the self” and this equates to ceasing to use the structural framework of concepts and connotations created by the Ego, we can start to see the connections between the different approaches to achieving some part of this experience.

Buddhist meditation practice focuses on relaxation, which might be seen as a way of trying to reduce the output of “raw” needs and desires by the id. The practice also focuses on developing the ability to experience without automatically assigning meaning and interpretation. Practitioners of Buddhist meditation are often told to “watch their thoughts as they go by” and to try not to follow any particular line of thought. In the terms discussed above, Buddhist meditation teaches practitioners to lessen the output of the Id and to lessen the engagement of the Ego. Those who find this practice useful are then better able to maintain a serene attitude to the daily problems of life and not get so upset when faced with a long line at the DMV or when the last raisin bagel has been sold.

Over the years I have taken several “self-improvement seminars”. I signed up for something called “Exegesis” in the U.K. which was essentially an English version of the American “EST” program. Later I participated in Landmark Education programs which are themselves an indirect descendent of EST. Although I found aspects of both of these programs cultish and troubling, I also gained significant benefits from my participation. Essentially these programs aim to work in two phases. Firstly they show that some of the automatic reactions that we have to our environment are in many ways arbitrary and that some of our beliefs are simply interpretations, and that other interpretations are possible. In the terms discussed above, they aim to reveal that individuals make use of a “conceptual dictionary” (or Ego) and show that the structure of that dictionary could be changed. In the second phase they teach alternate concepts which they believe will be useful and productive, and show individuals how to make these “entries” in their conceptual dictionary. As we have seen, entries in an individual’s conceptual dictionary are language elements which have a spoken or written word on one side and corresponding connotations and emotional reactions on the other. In order to make new language elements usable, the seminars therefore give names to their concepts. Landmark uses names such as “racket”, “possibility” and so on. Those that gain benefits from participation in these seminars find that they have a new set of concepts with which to interpret their environment, and that they are therefore able to deal more effectively with situations in their everyday lives. In terms of the concepts discussed above, this approach enables participants to make changes in their Ego (conceptual dictionary) which are positive and useful for them.

Anthony Robbins in his books such as “Awaken the Giant Within” aims to achieve similar result to the seminars. Robbins talks a lot about the power of language and again aims to create a set of useful language concepts which can be incorporated into one’s Ego or conceptual dictionary.

The most striking commonality between all these approaches to personal development is that they do not aim to directly change behavior. Rather they aim to allow practitioners to change their perception and interpretation (in terms of this paper equal to Ego or “conceptual dictionary”) in the belief that positive changes will result. This differs from the more traditional western approaches to self-improvement such as Dale Carnegie’s “How to Win Friends and Influence People”, which give direct prescriptions for behavior (“Don’t criticize or complain”, “Remember people’s names”, “Smile” and so on)

Hallucinogenic Drugs

In 1953 Aldous Huxley, the author of “Brave New World”, took the hallucinogenic drug mescaline — and decided to write a book about it. The Doors of Perception was published in 1954 — apparently also providing the source for the name of the band “The Doors”.

In the book he describes the details of his thoughts and perceptions. The experience seems to correspond closely in many ways with what I have labeled “loss of the self”. He ceases to analyze his perceptions (in my terms ceases to use his “conceptual dictionary” or Ego) and instead just experiences his sense impressions in something close to their raw state.

He says his experience is “moment by moment, naked existence”. When asked by a companion whether the experience is agreeable he responds: “Neither agreeable nor disagreeable…it just is.” From this again we can conjecture that his conceptual dictionary is partially switched off. Rather than asking whether something is good or bad and what it “means” to him “it just is”. Similarly he talks about seeing furniture and other objects in terms of their colors and shapes rather than in terms of their uses and functions.

I remember while a student at Sussex University, asking a friend why he hadn’t turned up to the practice session of our budding rock band. He replied “I couldn’t make it. I was at some other ant convention”. I of course understood from his response that my friend was taking time out from his studies for some personal psycho/chemical experimentation. The things that had seemed important to him somehow seemed as foolish and pointless as a convention of ants (and to be honest we weren’t actually that good). Anyone who has been around Buddhist monks will recognize this as similar to sort of objectification humor that they often use (although they are generally not as insulting).

I believe that the experience that some people have under the influence of Hallucinogenic Drugs is that the for the period of the “trip” the “conceptual dictionary” or Ego is forcibly largely switched off. As a result people see things without the filter of overlay of meaning that we normally apply. In doing so they may realize the arbitrary nature of their attitudes, goals, and beliefs, and have profound changes in perspectives. These realizations can be real and valid and are not just the result of a falsely altered perception created by the drug. At the same time hallucinogenic drugs do of course result in distortions to visual and auditory perceptions, so that the overall experience is a mix of enlightenment (ceasing to use the Ego) and delusion.

Huxley’s analysis is similar to this (and of course very much influenced my thought processes when I first read it). From his perspective the brain is a filter which cuts out all of the sense perceptions we don’t need, and this filter is temporarily disabled by the drug. He says:

“The function of the brain and nervous system is to protect us from being overwhelmed and confused by this mass of largely useless and irrelevant knowledge, by shutting out most of what we should otherwise perceive or remember at any moment, and leaving only that very small and special selection which is likely to be practically useful”

Ineffability

Finally I would like to attempt to answer the question as to why the various experiences of what is called enlightenment, from Buddhist meditation to the sudden joy of EST or Tony Robbins or seminar attendees, are seen as inexpressible in words.

Very simply all of these experiences involve “letting go of the self”, or ceasing to use what I have called one’s Ego, “Conceptual Dictionary” or “Understanding”. The Ego is the individual’s internal language structure and therefore ceasing to use the Ego is equivalent to ceasing to understand things in terms of concepts for which one has a name, that is ceasing to understand things in terms of words. It is of course difficult to describe this experience of “wordless perception” by using words.

[i]A note on definitions and use of concepts: In talking to some people about the ideas in this paper I have had an occasional response along the lines of “That’s not what is meant by ‘Id’”, “That’s not what Lacan was implying…”, “That’s not the idea behind Buddhism at all…” and so on. However, whether or not these criticisms are correct does not change what I am trying to say, and the ideas that I present here are still what I believe to be true. So when I use the word ‘Id’ I mean that concept that I define in this paper. I use the known words and refer to known concepts (Id, Ego, Mirror theory of the acquisition of language, etc) as the ideas that I use are certainly derived from and influenced by others’ expositions of these concepts. In fact, if the reader thinks that I have “got right” any of the concepts I am quite happy to accept that I am using the term in a standard and unoriginal way. What I am asking is that if the reader thinks that I have “got wrong” any of these concepts, or feels I am using it inappropriately, rather than automatically rejecting what I am saying, they consider the arguments on their own merits. If it helps to think of the concepts I have “got wrong” as “Phil’s version of Id”, “Phil’s version of Lacanian theory” and so on, please feel free to do so.

