"Right and Wrong" are Always Subjective - so Take Responsibility for Your Moral Perspective.
August 13 2021

Ethics/principals/morals/good and bad etc./ are not facts. If they were facts we could measure them precisely just as we can the height of a wall or the width of a door. The reason that measuring walls and doors is easy, and measuring moral rectitude is not, is that in the former case people can (almost) universally agree on exactly what elements of space define a given wall or door and on the definitions of units of measurement.  In the latter case there are no universally agreed measurements of a "good" or "bad" action.

The ABSOLUTE and DISTINGUISHING FEATURE of  a "normative" quality (i.e. ethics/principals/ morals/good and bad etc.) is that THERE IS NO UNIVERSALLY AGREED DEFINITION - that's it and no more. If everyone agreed that the "goodness" of a person could be precisely defined as the weight of ice-cream they had eaten in a year, or that the "moral rightness" of a given military action could be defined as the average amount of rainfall in Liverpool during the engagement - then these would cease to be moral/ethical questions. Certainly people might disagree about how good a given person was, or about the justness of a particular war, but these disputes would be disputes of fact only, and could be precisely and unarguably resolved by collecting factual information (respectively on ice-cream consumption and rainfall) and would only remain unresolved if that information were unavailable.

When people find themselves in dispute about a moral or ethical question they almost invariably try find evidence for their side by invoking another moral principle. Usually this is a complete waste of time. This only goes anywhere when one of the disputing parties can show to the satisfaction of both, that the other side's position contradicts an underlying moral principal on which they actually do agree. for example...

"Don't shoot that dog!"
"Why not? It peed on my hubcap!"
"But surely you recall that our religion tells us that it shall be unlawful to slay a quadruped on a Tuesday"
"My goodness you are right! I had quite forgotten that dogs had four legs, and I thought it was Thursday, etc, etc..."

Note that in this example resolution was only possible because one of the two parties was actually wrong. That is, they had made a mistaken deduction from underlying moral axioms on which both parties agreed. 
Most of the time of course this sort of resolution isn't possible - because there is a fundamental underlying matter on which the parties define the word "good" and "bad" differently, and no matter how much they appeal to other underlying moral principals to back up their arguments it takes them nowhere, because they will disagree on those principals as well.

It also means that there are no "correct" moral values as to say they are "correct" is to argue for the "correctness" of a definition - and it is no more possible to claim the absolute correctness of a given definition of the words "good" or "bad" than it is to claim the absolute "correctness" of a given definition of the word "plig". A given definition might be commonly agreed but that doesn't necessarily mean that it is "correct".

Now of course you might argue that there is an absolutely "correct" definition for the word "plig" (or for the words "good" or "bad"). I would of course disagree with you, and that would mean that we are now disputing about the meaning of the word "correct"; so that we are back where we started.

The only way out of this endless an pointless descent deeper and deeper into obscure and meaningless dissent is to give up. That is, to stop the futile attempt of trying to justify one's moral view point by appealing to underlying moral "truths". Instead real truth and clarity requires that one takes personal responsibility for one's moral perspective, and embrace rather than deny the fact, that for each of us our "rights and wrongs" ARE completely  biased, subjective and arbitrary EXCEPT in that they reflect our own personal likes and dislikes. 

This in no way implies that our actions or views will not consider the welfare of others. If we personally "like" a world where poor are cared for, or if we are distressed by the suffering of others, our personal morality will reflect these "personal preferences". Nor does this perspective invalidate the moral perspectives of religious adherents, as they will "like" a world which they believe conforms to the principals of their religion.

This perspective might seem to present a problem. There are some actions or behaviours that are almost univerally deplored: theft, slavery, or mass-murder, for example. Can we really say no more than we personally "don't like" these behaviours? Well yes, that is exactly what I am saying, even for these extreme examples. This has to be the case. 
Let's say that we meet someone that claims that mass murder of some population is a "good" thing. Me might find this person detestable, but we can't "prove" that they are wrong. If we try, we will find that we are dissagreeing with one of their moral axioms; say the claim that: "the 'blah-blah' people are 'evil' and 'should' be killed". We can counter with our own moral axiom which might be "most people deplore mass murder therefore it is wrong".  As with most moral arguments we find that the disagreement is really about the meaning of the words "good", "bad", "should", "should not, "right" and "wrong". We can appeal to a third party, that agrees with our perspective. However, our antagonist can do the same thing. Now the argument has shifted to which one of our respectively selected proponants has the greater "right" to arbitrate - and we are back where we started.

So if morality is subjective, does this mean that we have to be equally accepting of all outlooks and behaviours because they are just a reflection of someone else's "personal preferances"? I would argue that, on the contrary, this allows us to be more confident of our moral outlook, as we are laying claim to a set of values that we have defined for ourseleves, rather than just following a set of externally defined rules.

Let's take another extreme example: Adolf Hitler.
Speaking personally if I can say the following:
- I find the suffering of others distressing.
- I am happier in a world where people are not opressed for their ethnicity, religion, or political beliefs. I am unhappy when I see these things occur.
- I believe that Hitler contrevened these "personal preferences" to the extent that, had I been alive at the time, I hope that I would have had the courage to risk my life in fighting against Naziism.
Note these are all factual statements. I am taking responsiblity for my feelings, rather than appealing to some externally defined system of morality.
Am I really then saying anything more than this, if I add "Oh by the way, I also thing that Hitler was 'bad'"?

Ultimately in thinking about or discussing our moral perspectives or deciding what moral perspectives to embrace, we always have a choice. We can, and most people do, assign our moral beliefs to adherence to some underlying absolute moral principal. This is always an abdication of personal responsibility. Effectively this is a claim that our view is "right" and defending its "rightness" by referring to some moral absolute as though it was something independent from our own personal likes and dislikes. The particular problem with this, is that this denial of personal responsibility may allow people to act in ways which would be antithetical to their personal feelings or inclinations, it they were they nor protected by the armour of what they see as an objective moral principal.

The alternative is certainly less comfortable (but I believe more honest) is that we can take responsibility and lay claim to our moral perspective as a reflection of our own personal preferences.







